Migration Design: Rename Bundle to ClusterBundle (#485)
cert-manager/trust-manager: design/20241124-rename-bunde-to-clusterbundle.md

# Design: Renaming Bundle to ClusterBundle

- [Release Signoff Checklist](#release-signoff-checklist)
- [Summary](#summary)
- [Motivation](#motivation)
  - [Goals](#goals)
  - [Non-Goals](#non-goals)
- [Proposal](#proposal)
  - [Risks and Mitigations](#risks-and-mitigations)
- [Design Details](#design-details)
  - [Test Plan](#test-plan)
  - [Upgrade / Downgrade Strategy](#upgrade--downgrade-strategy)
- [Alternatives](#alternatives)
- [Future Work](#future-work)

## Release Signoff Checklist

This checklist contains actions which must be completed before a PR implementing this design can be
merged.

- [ ] This design doc has been discussed and approved
- [ ] Test plan has been agreed upon and the tests implemented
- [ ] User-facing documentation has been PR-ed against the release branch in [cert-manager/website]

TODO: add more items to checklist

## Summary

We want to rename `Bundle` to `ClusterBundle` for reasons described in "Motivation" below.

> Conversion webhooks in Kubernetes can only be used to convert between versions of and API,

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Conversion webhooks in Kubernetes can only be used to convert between versions of an API,
```

migration path for our users. For this reason we are proposing to do this change over multiple releases,
requiring end-user action on the way, but without risking trust-manager target resources - which can provide
critical features in a cluster. For additional details, please see "Proposal" below.

## Motivation

We have [an open issue](https://github.com/cert-manager/trust-manager/issues/63) suggesting renaming Bundle to ClusterBundle.
Might seem like an obvious WontFix, considering all the assumed work (and pain) to do this,
but it turns out that the current name somehow blocks introducing an equivalent namespace-scoped resource -
for trust bundle management inside namespaces in multi-tenant clusters.

In addition, `ClusterBundle` would be a better name looking at cert-manager having `Issuer` and `ClusterIssuer`.
The name would also be better aligned with upstream [ClusterTrustBundle](https://kubernetes.io/docs/reference/access-authn-authz/certificate-signing-requests/#cluster-trust-bundles).

### Goals

- `Bundle` resource is renamed to `ClusterBundle`
- Provide a smooth migration for users of trust-manager

### Non-Goals

> - Change/fix/improve `Bundle`/`ClusterBundle` API while renaming

Reviewer: If there are already known improvements, there's no particular reason to block them during this rename -- you can add them to the new ClusterBundle resource and adapt the Bundle shape as part of the migration.

Author: True! One example might be to make the namespaceSelector required. But any change will add complexity to the migration controller.

Reviewer: I think the complexity will be similar to a storage conversion controller, but it does add some complexity.

Author: Thanks a lot for pushing me on this @evankanderson! 👍 It seems to actually represent a huge opportunity for trust-manager. I did a simple draft of proposed API changes in this PR: https://github.com/cert-manager/trust-manager/pull/486. Will use it when discussing the proposal in our next bi-weekly meeting.

Author: Ok, I believe we can gain something if improving the API when migrating. I've now made adjustments to the proposal.

there will be no `ClusterBundle` resources in the cluster, as these will be created/updated by the technical
controller.

The `ClusterBundle` reconciler should do the same as for `Bundle` in version X, but we should test/verify that
the controller is able to change owner references on target resources from `Bundle` to `ClusterBundle` without
facing issues.

We must also ensure that the `ClusterBundle` reconciler isn't deleting target resources it thinks are "orphaned".
We believe the controller will only delete target resources if/when the controller resource exists, and
otherwise rely on the Kubernetes garbage collector to delete orphans. But this should be tested/verified.

### Temporary Technical Controller

When the functional controller is migrated to target `ClusterBundle`, we want to introduce a temporary technical
controller targeting the now deprecated `Bundle` resource.

This controller should just create or update the `ClusterBundle` with the same name as the reconciled `Bundle`.
Since the APIs should have identical `spec`, this should be a simple controller.

To allow a user to migrate their resources from `Bundle` to `ClusterBundle`, the controller should not act

> on `Bundle` delete events. Nor add an owner reference to `ClusterBundle` to avoid the Kubernetes garbage collector
> to act on deletes.

Reviewer 2: nitpick (wording): (it really doesn't matter though, it's perfectly understandable as is!)

```suggestion
on `Bundle` delete events - nor should it add an owner reference to `ClusterBundle` to avoid the Kubernetes garbage collector
acting on deletes.
```

#### Target configmaps/secrets are accidentally deleted

Since using owner references in this project, we need to be extra careful when performing changes like this.

We mitigate this risk by **NOT** cascading deletes of `Bundle` to `ClusterBundle`.
This is done by **NOT** adding owner references to `ClusterBundle`, and instead use the resource `name`
to map between `ClusterBundle` and `Bundle` resources.

Owner references on target resources are changed by the reconciler from `Bundle` to `ClusterBundle`,
which means targets could only be deleted if the `ClusterBundle` is deleted or `namespaceSelector`
is changed. This is the expected behavior.

#### Target configmaps/secrets appearing as orphaned

This could happen if a users deletes a `Bundle` resource expecting the target configmaps/secrets
to vanish. Unfortunately this won't happen by the defensive approach taken to not cascade `Bundle`
delete to `ClusterBundle`.

In order to achieve the wanted behavior, a user would have to delete the corresponding `ClusterBundle`,
which appears like a simple workaround that we should document.

## Design Details

### Test Plan

TODO

### Upgrade / Downgrade Strategy

> Downgrading from a version where the migration has started will probably not be possible and should

Reviewer: The risk on downgrade is that the ownerReference will be pointed to the ClusterBundle resources that have just been deleted, right? 

What if you point the ownerReference to *both* the Bundle and the ClusterBundle objects?

Author: Thanks! I need to dig deeper into potential upgrade/downgrade risks and eventual mitigations.

Reviewer 2: I'd be super interested to see how multiple owner references plays out - that does seem like a way to enable downgrades at least on the face of it? I guess if someone downgraded then the ownerref for the clusterbundle will be invalid (since clusterbundle won't exist any more) but I don't know what problems that would cause in practice?

Author: Ok, I have tried to improve the upgrade/downgrade strategy according to your feedback. Thanks again!

### Goals

- `Bundle` resource is renamed to `ClusterBundle`
- Provide a smooth migration for users of trust-manager
- Use the opportunity window to improve the API
  - [Issue summarizing proposed API changes (#242)](https://github.com/cert-manager/trust-manager/issues/242)
  - [Draft PR for proposed API changes done when migrating (#486)](https://github.com/cert-manager/trust-manager/pull/486)

### Non-Goals

- Behavior changes in `Bundle`/`ClusterBundle` API while migrating (only simpler API improvements)
- Introduce a new API version
- Introduce a namespace-scoped bundle API (at least not now)

## Proposal

We propose to do this change over multiple releases:

1. Version X: Only `Bundle` API is served and has the functional controller. (present state)
2. Version X+1: We introduce `ClusterBundle` with API otherwise identical to `Bundle`:
   - `Bundle` is marked as deprecated.
   - `ClusterBundle` introduced with agreed API improvements.
   - Functional controller is migrated to `ClusterBundle`
   - Validating webhook for both `Bundle` and `ClusterBundle` with same validations
   - New technical controller added for `Bundle`, converting bundles to cluster bundles

> 3. Version Y: Remove `Bundle` and only serve `ClusterBundle` (desired state)

Reviewer 2: question: Is there any reason we couldn't have the following:

1. Version X: Status quo
2. Version X+1: Introduce `ClusterBundle` resource
    - Totally separate controller to `Bundle`
    - `Bundle` completely unaffected
    - Same `BundleSpec` shared between both resources
    - Warn in logs whenever `Bundle` is created (saying users should be creating `ClusterBundle`s instead)
3. Version Y: Start migrating `Bundle` resources to `ClusterBundle`s
4. Version Z: Remove `Bundle`

We can start the migration at the same time as we add the new CRD, but it seems like this way we can make a bit of progress (i.e. add ClusterBundle) without impacting anything else?

Author: Since a `Bundle` and `ClusterBundle` could then address the same target resources (by name), we would have to this into account in controllers. In addition, we would have a LOT more code to maintain and test. This is something I don't recommend, but I will add this to the list of alternatives. 👍

Author: I have added your suggestion as an alternative now.

We mitigate this risk by **NOT** cascading deletes of `Bundle` to `ClusterBundle`.
This is done by **NOT** adding owner references to `ClusterBundle`, and instead use the resource `name`
to map between `ClusterBundle` and `Bundle` resources.

Owner references on target resources are changed by the reconciler from `Bundle` to `ClusterBundle`,
which means targets could only be deleted if the `ClusterBundle` is deleted or `namespaceSelector`
is changed. This is the expected behavior.

#### Target configmaps/secrets appearing as orphaned

This could happen if a users deletes a `Bundle` resource expecting the target configmaps/secrets
to vanish. Unfortunately this won't happen by the defensive approach taken to not cascade `Bundle`
delete to `ClusterBundle`.

In order to achieve the wanted behavior, a user would have to delete the corresponding `ClusterBundle`,
which appears like a simple workaround that we should document.

## Design Details

### Test Plan

TODO

### Upgrade / Downgrade Strategy

Downgrading from a version where the migration has started will probably not be possible and should
be clearly documented and stated in the release notes.

> ## Alternatives

Reviewer 2: question: Is it worth listing the alternative of "don't try to migrate anyone"?

Like, if we marked `Bundle` as deprecated but continued to support a controller for it, it wouldn't cause any problems beyond a bit more code to maintain, right?

(I'm not necc. saying that we _should_ do that, but it seems like a scenario we should address in this doc right?)

(I'm assuming that we change the group to `trust-manager.io` for `ClusterBundle`, which would mean that keeping `trust.cert-manager.io Bundle` wouldn't conflict with a future namespace scoped `trust-manager.io Bundle`)

Author: I have tried to explain above why I **don't** think we should support both resources independently - at the same time. But I will add this option to the alternatives for sure.

Renaming the API group is excellent input! I will add this too.

Author: New `trust-manager.io` API group is now added to the list of goals. 👍 

And added a new independent controller as one of the alternatives.

critical features in a cluster. For additional details, please see "Proposal" below.

## Motivation

We have [an open issue](https://github.com/cert-manager/trust-manager/issues/63) suggesting renaming Bundle to ClusterBundle.
Might seem like an obvious WontFix, considering all the assumed work (and pain) to do this,
but it turns out that the current name somehow blocks introducing an equivalent namespace-scoped resource -
for trust bundle management inside namespaces in multi-tenant clusters.

In addition, `ClusterBundle` would be a better name looking at cert-manager having `Issuer` and `ClusterIssuer`.
The name would also be better aligned with upstream [ClusterTrustBundle](https://kubernetes.io/docs/reference/access-authn-authz/certificate-signing-requests/#cluster-trust-bundles).

By pushing users to migrate smoothly to a new API, we can perform requested API changes at the same time.
Consider it similar to a one-way conversion webhook.

Since trust-manager is maturing and getting more attention, we suggest establishing its own API group: `trust-manager.io`.

### Goals

- `Bundle` resource is renamed to `ClusterBundle`

> - `ClusterBundle` is created in the new `trust-manager.io` API group

Reviewer 3: to trust-manager.io from cert-manager.io?

Author: Yes, from `trust.cert-manager.io` to `trust-manager.io` - as a grown-up. 😉

there will be no `ClusterBundle` resources in the cluster, as these will be created/updated by the technical
controller.

The `ClusterBundle` reconciler should do the same as for `Bundle` in version X, but we should test/verify that
the controller is able to change owner references on target resources from `Bundle` to `ClusterBundle` without
facing issues.

We must also ensure that the `ClusterBundle` reconciler isn't deleting target resources it thinks are "orphaned".
We believe the controller will only delete target resources if/when the controller resource exists, and
otherwise rely on the Kubernetes garbage collector to delete orphans. But this should be tested/verified.

### Temporary Technical Controller

When the functional controller is migrated to target `ClusterBundle`, we want to introduce a temporary technical
controller targeting the now deprecated `Bundle` resource.

This controller should just create or update the `ClusterBundle` with the same name as the reconciled `Bundle`.
Since the APIs should be quite similar, this should be a simple controller.

- `Bundle` `.spec` should be copied (and eventually slightly converted) into `ClusterBundle` `.spec`

> - `Bundle` `.status` should be updated from `ClusterBundle` `.status`

Reviewer 4: I think we should also add a clear message in the `Bundle` `.status` stating that using the `Bundle` is deprecated.
Also, the validation webhook should throw a warning explaining that the `Bundle` resources are deprecated.

Author: CRDs supports deprecating APIs/versions, and we can tailor the warning message. Isn't this enough?

### Proposed API changes when migrating

Improving the trust-manager API while migrating is not something we have to do, but
appears like nice opportunity to fix some of the long-standing proposed API changes.

There is an [open draft PR for proposed (and breaking) API changes](https://github.com/cert-manager/trust-manager/pull/486),
but in order to make this a non-braking change for users, only the `ClusterBundle` API will include these changes.

While this is subject to change, an example on how a user would migrate from `Bundle` to `ClusterBundle` without
changing anything for target resources is shown below:

```yaml
---
apiVersion: trust.cert-manager.io/v1alpha1
kind: Bundle
metadata:
  name: my-bundle
spec:
  sources:
    - configMap:
        name: my-ca
        key: ca.crt
  target:
    configMap:
      key: ca.crt
    additionalFormats:
      jks:
        key: bundle.jks
      pkcs12:
        key: bundle.p12
```

Which would be migrated to:

```yaml
---
apiVersion: trust-manager.io/v1alpha1
kind: ClusterBundle
metadata:
  name: my-bundle
spec:
  sources:
    - configMap:
        name: my-ca
        key: ca.crt

>   target:

Author: Interesting! Could you draw an example? 😊

>   target:

Author: Good input, thanks! I suggest moving the detailed API changes discussion to https://github.com/cert-manager/trust-manager/issues/242. I have also opened https://github.com/cert-manager/trust-manager/pull/486, which will be modified to change the initially unserved `ClusterBundle` - after it's introduced.

For this design, I suggest we agree that we **should** consider changing the API. And not exactly what we want to change. Are you ok with this approach?

    configMap:
      - key: ca.crt
      - key: bundle.jks
        format: JKS
      - key: bundle.p12
        format: PKCS12
    namespaceSelector: {} # Selecting all namespaces here, but now required in API
```

### Risks and Mitigations

> #### Target configmaps/secrets are accidentally deleted

Reviewer 4: There are two conflicting goals here:
- we do not want to break the behavior when deleting the `Bundle` resource
- we want to support users who remove the `Bundle` resource and start using the `ClusterBundle` instead.

Reviewer 4: An alternative approach here would be to add owner references and document how to remove those owner references when you want to start using the `ClusterBundle` as the new "source of truth".

Reviewer 4: If "owner references" are too complex, we can also implement our own garbage collector (eg. using labels).

Author: Why do you consider this as "conflicting goals"? I did not mention "do not want to break the behavior when deleting the Bundle resource" as a goal specifically, did I? 🤔 Considering the alpha state of Bundle API, I don't see a big harm in potentially orphaning some resources that can easily be deleted by the user as a workaround. The alternative could be a lot more destructive.

As a user, I **don't** want my `ClusterBundle` to be deleted when the corresponding `Bundle` is deleted. Maybe I am missing your point. Please clarify!
